.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Apple Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\"
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this
.\" file.
.\"
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.Dd October 22, 2025
.Dt OPENAT_AUTHENTICATED_NP 2
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm openat_authenticated_np
.Nd open files with authenticated volume verification
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <fcntl.h>
.Ft int
.Fo openat_authenticated_np
.Fa "int fd"
.Fa "const char *path"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fa "int authfd"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn openat_authenticated_np
function is a non-portable extension to the standard
.Xr openat 2
system call that provides authenticated volume verification capabilities.
.Pp
.Fn openat_authenticated_np
opens a file specified by
.Fa path
relative to the directory
.Fa fd ,
ensuring it resides within an authenticated volume.
The optional
.Fa authfd
parameter, when provided, ensures that the target file resides in the same authenticated volume as the file referenced by that file descriptor.
.Pp
The
.Fa flags
parameter has the same meaning as in
.Xr openat 2 ,
with the restriction that file creation is not supported.
If
.Dv O_CREAT
is specified in
.Fa flags ,
the function will fail with
.Er EINVAL .
.Pp
If
.Fa fd
is
.Dv AT_FDCWD ,
the current working directory is used and the behavior is similar to
.Xr open 2 .
.Pp
If
.Fa authfd
is
.Dv AUTH_OPEN_NOAUTHFD ,
no authentication file descriptor is used and the function operates without volume authentication constraints.
Otherwise,
.Fa authfd
must be a valid file descriptor that serves as the authentication reference for volume verification.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion,
.Fn openat_authenticated_np
returns a non-negative file descriptor.
Otherwise, it returns -1 and sets
.Va errno
to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
In addition to the errors returned by
.Xr openat 2 ,
.Fn openat_authenticated_np
may fail with:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Dv O_CREAT
was specified in
.Fa flags .
.It Bq Er EBADF
.Fa authfd
is not
.Dv AUTH_OPEN_NOAUTHFD
and is not a valid file descriptor.
.It Bq Er EPERM
The calling process does not have permission to perform authenticated volume access.
.It Bq Er ENOTSUP
The underlying file system does not support authenticated volume verification.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Open a file ensuring it resides in the same authenticated volume as another file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
int dirfd = open("/some/directory", O_RDONLY);
int authfd = open("/path/to/auth/file", O_RDONLY);
int fd = openat_authenticated_np(dirfd, "filename",
                                O_RDONLY, authfd);
if (fd == -1) {
    perror("openat_authenticated_np");
    exit(1);
}
close(authfd);
close(dirfd);
.Ed
.Pp
Open a file without volume authentication constraints:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
int dirfd = open("/some/directory", O_RDONLY);
int fd = openat_authenticated_np(dirfd, "filename",
                                O_RDONLY, AUTH_OPEN_NOAUTHFD);
if (fd == -1) {
    perror("openat_authenticated_np");
    exit(1);
}
close(dirfd);
.Ed
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
This function is a non-portable Apple extension and is not available on other operating systems.
Code using this function should include appropriate conditional compilation directives for portability.
.Pp
The
.Dv _DARWIN_C_SOURCE
feature test macro must be defined to access the authentication constants.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr open 2 ,
.Xr openat 2 ,
.Xr close 2 ,
.Xr fcntl 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn openat_authenticated_np
function was introduced in macOS 13.0 to provide authenticated file access capabilities for system frameworks requiring volume authentication verification.
.Sh NOTES
This function is primarily intended for use by system frameworks and applications that need authenticated volume verification.
Most applications should use the standard
.Xr open 2
and
.Xr openat 2
functions unless specific authentication features are required.
.Pp
The function operates in read-only mode for authentication purposes and does not support file creation.
Applications should create files using standard functions and then open them with authentication if needed.
